>>LISA GARR: Hello.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Welcome to "Gaiam Inspirations."
We're coming to you live
from Boulder, Colorado,
here at the Gaiam
Studios in Boulder.
And we encourage you
to interact with us
via Facebook and Twitter.
Since this is a live show,
please connect with us.
Many of you already
have started that chat,
so keep the questions
coming so we'll
get to them later
on in the show.
So, today we're talking
about space and time,
and what it means to live
in a holographic universe.
And we're talking
about all of this
from the perspective
of quantum physics
so that we can find out how
to take charge of our lives
at the quantum level.
And joining me is
Fred Allan Wolfe.
He's a physicist.
And he's got 14 books
on quantum physics.
One of them is called "Time
Loops and Space Twists."
He's also known
affectionately as Dr. Quantum.
He has a really wonderful way of
taking these abstract concepts
and simplifying them so
that we can apply them
to our own lives.
Welcome to the show.
>>FRED ALLAN WOLFE: Thank
you very much, Lisa.
Pleasure to be here.
>>LISA: As you can see,
Dr. Quantum's a lot of fun.
So this really helps--
>>FRED: I hope so.
I hope so.
>>LISA: --helps us understand
quantum physics, a very complex
topic.
So, let's talk a little bit
about how time is an illusion.
That's really the basis of
what we're talking about today.
>>FRED: Actually, what we're
really talking about today
is how you can become an
artist in your own life
and create your universe.
>>LISA: Create your universe.
>>FRED: How to be an artist
creating your universe.
Because that is the real
trick to understanding
the nature of time,
space, matter,
all that stuff is
really understanding
who you really are.
And most of us don't
know who we really are.
We think we are something else.
>>LISA: Right.
>>FRED: And so,
what is the answer?
How do I become an artist
creating the universe?
And the answer is
learning to identify
with the dreaming
creator that you are.
And that's something
that sounds--
that sounds like science fiction
to me, Dr. Quantum, whatever.
How do I do that?
How do I go about doing that?
Well, we have to look for
some ancient teachings
to get some of this wisdom.
>>LISA: That'll help us.
>>FRED: That might help us.
And one of the ancient teachers
who first brought this out
to us all was somebody
that lived almost 2,600,
2,700 years ago he was
called Gautama, the Buddha.
And he said that the
trick, guys, bikinibu--
what'd he called his-- bhikkhus.
Bhikkus.
Priests, guys that are studying
under me, sitting at my feet.
>>LISA: Disciples.
>>FRED: The trick--
disciples, right.
He says to know all things to
be like this, that what you're
seeing before you is a mirage,
a cloud floating in the air.
It's a phantom.
It's nothing really
real that you can really
put your feet on.
It has no essence.
It has nothing solid
that can be seen.
Know all things to be like
this, as the moon reflected
in a bright night
on a still stream.
>>LISA: So he was explaining
quantum physics way back then.
>>FRED: He was
explaining the basis
of how one identifies
with the big dreamer
by understanding that all things
are really dreamlike rather
than solid reality.
He says know all
things to be like this,
to be something really
special, like an echo.
You hear an echo
reverberating in your ear,
but it's nothing spoken.
So this is the big trick.
As a magician might create
illusions of various things,
think of yourself
as the magician
creating the illusions.
You may be amazed at the
illusions you create.
>>LISA: OK, so this
is how we start
to create our own universe.
>>FRED: This is how we
create our own reality.
This is what the
Buddha's referring to.
But the first thing
you've got to refer to
is to understand that
everything is not as it seems.
Now, physicists
didn't quite catch on
with this at the
time of the Buddha.
Because there weren't
any physicists.
>>LISA: At the time.
>>FRED: --anyway.
In fact, around 1920 there
wasn't even maybe 300 of them
all in the whole earth.
So, by the time of
Werner Heisenberg, who
was a father of what's called
the uncertainty principle,
we begin to catch on.
And Heisenberg recognized that
what the physics was telling
him-- which is the birth
of quantum physics--
is that things are not as solid
as they appear, that there's
another realm of existence, what
he calls a middle realm, that's
between the conscious
mind and waking awareness
and something else,
something that's
between that conscious mind
and the so-called out there
world of physicality.
>>LISA: So there's something
between what we want--
>>FRED: Something between--
>>LISA: --and what is.
>>FRED: Yeah.
Something between
the material world
and the mind, which is created.
There is a middle
realm, something else,
a dreaming realm you might call.
In fact, I called it
the dreaming universe.
>>LISA: And that's
where we create.
That's where we get--
that's where the juice is.
>>FRED: This is where
creation comes from.
>>LISA: It's space
between the reality
and what we're creating.
>>FRED: Exactly.
And the elements of the
dream, the things that
come into this imaginal
realm of the dream world,
are the things that you've
worked with in new ways.
I mean, Freud was the first
to point out, there you are.
And you are in bed
with your mother.
Oh my God.
But she's only 20 years old.
How could I be doing that?
And all the kind
of weird Freudian
stuff that came out of there.
But Freud was
pointing to something
about the nature of dreams,
that time and space and matter
don't have the same meanings.
That thoughts and
feelings and sensations
don't have the same meanings.
But time, space, matter,
thoughts, and feelings
arise from this middle
realm, this invisible realm--
>>LISA: From this realm--
>>FRED: Of existance.
>>LISA: --where we are often the
observer of that realm, right?
>>FRED: Exactly.
Exactly.
And we are observing in that
realm, although most of us--
many of us, for example,
sleep and we don't even
remember our dreams.
But some people do.
And some people wake
up in the dream.
We call that lucid dreaming.
And we have an experience
of the creative power
in lucid dreaming-- if
you begin to practice
that kind of a thing.
Anyway, that's the whole idea.
There's a story going on.
There's a story,
and your story is
made from this invisible realm.
You're putting together
the ideas of a story
like braids that are being
twisted into storylines
of histories and stuff
that happened to you.
But the whole idea,
remember, is to identify
with the dreamer rather
than the dreamed.
>>LISA: Someone is asking--
one of our Facebook listeners
is asking-- Caroline-- when you
reference the observer in all
of us, do you mean awareness?
Do you--
>>FRED: Awareness is
something an observer does.
But the observer is
even beyond awareness.
The observer is something you
might call the super awareness
if you want to give it a name.
Or the mind of God if you want
to give it that kind of a name.
It's awareness beyond awareness.
>>LISA: So it's a
universal awareness?
>>FRED: It's something we call
the universal awareness, mind
of God.
It's--
>>LISA: Universal consciousness?
>>FRED: Universal consciousness.
Anytime you name it,
you sort of limit it.
We don't have the right
limits to apply to it yet.
So we can call it whatever
you wish at this point.
>>LISA: OK.
OK.
Holographic universe, as
we were talking about.
>>FRED: Well that
we can get into.
Holographic universe,
I mean, what
the heck is going on there?
Well, in a larger
sense, in physics we
have found out that
quantum physics--
when you try to
put quantum physics
and Einstein's general
theory of relativity,
which was the attempt to bring
gravity into space and time,
when you try to
put those together
it's so hard to do
that nobody really
has figured out a way
to do it consistently.
It's almost like it eludes us.
>>LISA: To take
quantum physics and--
>>FRED: And general
theory of relativity.
>>LISA: --together.
>>FRED: Put gravity and
quantum physics together.
You can't seem to do it.
>>LISA: Because one's
abstract and one's--
>>FRED: One is
big and out there.
>>LISA: Concrete.
>>FRED: And the other's small
and in here, so to speak.
And so it's very hard to do.
But physicists aren't
tired of giving up.
I mean they're not
tired of going on.
They don't give up.
They keep going on with this.
And they figured
out a new idea that
came when they
studied black holes.
They figured out-- a
black hole, by the way,
is when you have a
gravitationally collapsed star
that has so much mass that
it forms something called
a black hole, where space and
time around the black hole
get twisted in a
weird kind of way.
And something called a horizon--
spherical horizon-- forms
around the collapsed matter.
And on that horizon, space
and time get very weird.
And Stephen Hawking,
a physicist,
said you know, black
holes don't seem-- I mean,
if you throw something into a
black hole, it just disappears.
But in quantum
physics, we're always
worried about
things disappearing.
If they disappear, I
want them to come back.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Because we've become
attached to reality.
>>FRED: We don't
want things-- what
happens to the information?
Where does the information go?
And quantum physics don't
want to give up information.
And so, a physicist,
Jacob Bekenstein,
figured out that
the information gets
stored on the surfaces
of black holes.
>>LISA: Around that sphere?
Around--
>>FRED: Around this
collapsing stars.
And that got very weird.
Because if that's
true, then one could
map, from the information stored
on the black hole, everything
that was outside of
it that fell into it.
So, suddenly it became
possible-- physicists thought--
maybe everything in the universe
is on the surface of something.
Does it have to be a black hole?
And the answer
turned out to be it
doesn't have to be a black hole.
It can be any surface, anywhere,
where information could be
stored in such a way
that projected from that
information-- just like a movie
is projected from a camera--
>>LISA: So could also
happen within our own minds.
>>FRED: Not only our
own minds, but the thing
we're in right now, this
space we're in right now
is also being projected.
Even the third
dimension is being
projected from this surface.
In other words, we ourselves
are being projected
from the surfaces
of something that's
where at infinity both forward
in time and backward in time
at the time of the Big Bang.
>>LISA: And now we're back--
>>FRED: In other words,
we are in the mind of God.
And we're having this
illusion of being
little itty tiny people doing
our things, bah, bah, bah, bah.
>>LISA: Well, right now,
we're in the studio.
And right now we're trying to
bring it back here to reality.
We're right here on this day.
>>FRED: Reality, what a concept.
I mean that's really--
>>LISA: There isn't reality
in your world, is there?
>>FRED: There is.
There is, but as
I say, the trick
is identifying with the
dreamer, identifying
with the guy who's running
the projection show.
>>LISA: Which is us,
which is essentially us.
>>FRED: That's the clue.
That's the clue, that we're
also running the projector.
And that's where fun can be
had and something more exciting
can take place.
>>LISA: He's a lot of
fun to hang out with.
All right, so
basically, what you
perceive life as, and
everything in life, is light.
Can you explain a
little bit about that?
>>FRED: Well, the trick is that
when people began to experiment
with this idea that everything's
on surfaces, this got a name.
It was called
holographic principle,
in which they figured out that
all the stuff that's going on
on the surface, all the
quarks and the things
banging around and so forth,
that the projections of those
into something called space,
third dimension of space,
the world we live in, turned
out to bring out gravity.
Gravity suddenly emerged
along with that space.
So suddenly, gravity appeared.
Drop an apple.
Now we know why it's dropping.
It's because it's emerging
from this two dimensional
surface of stuff.
And so, the idea was, well,
what's making these surfaces?
And so, I have the idea that
what is making these surfaces
is something called
a sheet of light.
So what we have,
really, is a light sheet
which starts out from,
maybe, the beginning of time,
ending at the ending of time.
Or it could be something
which starts out
at the beginning of
a moment and ending
at the ending of a moment.
And all the information
that's needed
to make a room
appear, with us in it,
are coming from light
sheets that we are emitting
to some final point, and light
sheets which are coming in--
>>LISA: Coming in--
>>FRED: --from--
>>LISA: --other points.
>>FRED: Other points.
>>LISA: So right now--
>>FRED: Yeah, right now.
And the way we think
about that is we're
sending out light sheets both
backwards and forwards in time.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So, right now, this is
what's creating our universe,
is these lights.
>>FRED: That's right.
>>LISA: The waves lights--
>>FRED: The projections are from
light sheets from the beginning
and the ending of time.
>>LISA: So if you really
were to look at a room,
it would be filled
with matter of light.
>>FRED: With light sheets
forming gravity, matter,
energy.
Everything that's
forming is being
formed by projections
from light sheets.
>>LISA: So--
>>FRED: Just like
a real holograph.
You know, if you look at a
hologram, and you look at it--
>>LISA: Dimensions--
>>FRED: And you look
through it, the hologram
itself is a flat
sheet of something.
And it's got waviness on it.
You don't see any picture there.
Shine a laser light through
it, and suddenly there--
>>LISA: There it is.
>>FRED: There's a three
dimensional object
right out there.
Well, just carry that out a
couple more steps further.
And not only do you see an image
of a three dimensional object,
there is a three
dimensional object.
>>LISA: A three
>>FRED: Because you can
feel and hold in your hand.
And it has weight.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>FRED: And you can drop it and
it falls like an apple, too.
>>LISA: And it's
just basically light
slowed down into dense reality.
>>FRED: Well, it's--
>>LISA: OK, well--
>>FRED: hard to explain
what it actually
is, but, like a hologram,
what is that image that's
floating out in space?
Is that-- I mean,
we see it there.
But is it really there?
Well, it's an illusion that
it's really there, right?
>>LISA: I love it.
Yes.
>>FRED: It's an
illusion, that's right.
So is the apple really there?
Well, it's really there,
but is it really there?
Or is it an illusion of
weight and matter and energy
that's being projected
holographically?
>>LISA: See, I look at this
from the perspective of
is your chaos really there,
or is it an illusion?
Is your stress really
there, or is it an illusion?
Is your negativity really
>>FRED: It's really
all illusion,
but we give importance to it.
And that's where we learn--
that's when we stop identifying
with the creator, when we
start giving importance
to the illusion
rather than to what
may be really
important in our lives.
>>LISA: And one of
our listeners was
asking if this field--
Drake was asking
is the field that we're
in what connects us all?
Is that holographic
field that we're
in-- how does quantum
physics explain
how or why we are all connected?
>>FRED: Well, we're not
really all connected.
We're all one.
The thing which is happening
is how do we get all separated?
>>LISA: Did I mention we're on
for a wild ride here, today?
This is great.
>>FRED: You see, connection
implies separate to begin with,
and then you connect.
But what if you're one to begin
with and then you separate?
So it's really more
how do we get separate?
And the thing which
separates us, of course,
is part of this
illusion of there
being separate hunks of
matter, and identifying
with separate hunks of matter,
including separate bodies.
And in that process
of identification,
we cut the strands which
are always been there,
but we don't pay
attention to them.
And there we go,
going through life.
And suddenly we get
sexually mature,
and we get, oh my God, I
feel the urge to connect.
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
That's what that is.
>>FRED: That's what that is.
>>LISA: All right, so we were
talking about sheets of light
and how everything
is a sheet of light.
And then, how this connects us.
>>FRED: Well, these
sheets of light
contain the
information which make
what we call the
appearance of reality.
So, these sheets
of light are really
the projection screens out of
which the things that we call
the real world come
into existence.
So that's what that's all about.
That's what the picture
is trying to tell us.
It's a little difficult
picture to understand,
but that's basically
what it's telling us.
>>LISA: So, OK.
So, explain to us what
this all means to us today,
how we are living in a
holographic illusion.
>>FRED: Well, the whole idea is
that you, right now, at home,
exist in the mind of God at
infinite beginning of time,
at infinite ending of time.
You are there.
>>FRED: And by God you
mean the universal--
>>FRED: I mean the mind of God.
I mean whatever you
want a call that.
That intelligence field,
the big field in the sky.
However you want
to talk about it.
>>LISA: The human energy
field, the quantum field.
>>FRED: Give it any
name you want to.
It's more than human.
It could be any-- could be
all animal life gets it.
And all rocks get it.
And everybody gets it.
So it's a big field--
>>LISA: That Fred
calls the mind of God.
>>FRED: I call it
the mind of God.
And what happens is
it projects via light
into whatever
space, time, matter,
particulate of where you are
at any particular moment.
And at that moment,
it also provides you
with an identification procedure
in which you say I am here now.
>>LISA: OK.
So that's how--
that is basically
how the entire field--
this holographic illusion--
from the observer, from us the
observer, says we are here now.
So can we, indeed, observe
our past differently?
>>FRED: We can
observe anything we
want if we begin the
identification process that I
mentioned to you, which is to
stop identifying with the here
and now.
Because the here
and now-- I mean,
all the greats spiritual
teachers said be here now.
Well, it turns
out that's as much
of a fantasy as
what you might think
anything I'm saying right here.
You can't be here, now.
Because there is
no here now to be.
>>LISA: That's a good point.
>>FRED: So, the whole point is
you're everywhere, at all time.
And that's the real reality
of who and what you are.
And so, being here,
now, focusing in,
which is part of what
I teach in my books
and so forth, that's
part of the process.
If you understand that it's
a process that you can learn,
then you can begin to
identify with that which
is making that process, rather
than identify with the process
and be stuck in it.
>>LISA: OK.
So I want to go back to
our Facebook questions.
And it basically
says, will this--
how will this lead us
into a sustainable future?
How will this whole
concept of quantum physics
lead us to a sustainable future?
>>FRED: Well, what does it mean
to be a sustainable future?
What does it mean
to be sustainable?
Having enough to eat?
Having enough money to spend?
Having enough clothes to wear?
Having enough air to breathe?
>>LISA: Enough.
>>FRED: OK.
If we can imagine those
things-- if we can imagine them,
then we can imagine-- we can
allow our dreams to tell us
what we need to do to
improve the situation,
or make it better, or make
it more real for other people
who are suffering.
There's still lots
of people that
don't have enough of
the things that we
may want to have
more of, they don't
have enough of to begin with.
So we have to begin
to think globally
about the whole situation.
>>LISA: So we really
can affect this
with our collective
consciousness.
>>FRED: We're doing
it all the time.
We're doing it all the time.
I mean, the mind is more than
just the individual mind.
And when events start to happen,
they happen everywhere at once.
They don't just happen in
one or two individuals that
have this idea, but a lot of
people have the same idea.
Some people carry the idea
out, and they get known for it.
But other people were
having the ideas, too.
They may decide it
was just a fantasy.
Or I don't want to do that.
Or whatever.
But once an idea starts
to-- once the dreamer starts
to dream, then the dream
begins to manifest.
>>LISA: So then, how
can we, indeed, affect
our future with this concept?
How can we start to
project into the future
with the concept of the dreamer?
>>FRED: Well, that's
what the dreamer is.
The dreamer is in
the future already.
So the dreamer is already there.
And there are multiple dreams.
There are many different
possible dreams of the future,
from your perspective.
But you've got to remember
you are the dreamer,
and the future is
already where you're at.
So, now you have
to figure out a way
to connect where you're at
to where you think you are,
which is like in
the here and now.
So in some courses in
positive thinking or whatever,
they tell you to realize
your goals by pretending
you're already have really--
I want to be a millionaire,
well think of yourself as having
a million dollars right now.
Well, that's the dreamer
in the future of you
as a millionaire reaching back
to where you are right now.
>>LISA: All right.
I want to get back to
our Facebook questions.
And so, thank you very
much for bringing us--
for communicating with us
via Facebook and Twitter.
So do you believe that your
mind-- Judy from Facebook
asks do you believe that
your mind is powerful enough
to heal the body?
And is there any science
in quantum physics
that actually proves that?
>>FRED: The body mind
has got mind in it.
So healing cannot take
place without mind.
If you want to see something
try to heal itself,
watch a bar of iron
that has a nick in it.
>>LISA: It's not--
>>FRED: It'll rust over,
but it ain't going to heal,
because there's not much
mind stuff going on there.
There's some, but not much.
But you cut your
finger and suddenly you
see the body mind acting.
You might be able
to even influence
with your conscious mind.
In other words, you may
actually influence or change
the healing pattern.
>>LISA: That is so interesting.
So we can, with our minds,
really affect our healing.
We can also adversely
affect our disease.
We can--
>>FRED: We can also
adversely affect our healing.
So there are many
things that we can do--
>>LISA: That's-- yeah--
>>FRED: And with--
>>LISA: That's what
I meant by disease.
Yeah.
>>FRED: And it's a
question-- right now,
how much do you want to pay
attention to in your body?
>>LISA: I want to pay attention
to the health of my body.
>>FRED: OK, well,
what does that mean?
For example, do you
want to pay attention
to the blood which is moving
through your heart right now?
Do you want to watch that?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>FRED: Yeah?
Do you?
>>LISA: Why not?
>>FRED: Well, yeah.
Well, suppose you have
negative thoughts, something
that comes up.
Is that-- you want to be
able to stop your blood
from flowing in your heart?
>>LISA: No.
>>FRED: No.
So there are certain autonomic
functions of your body
that you just don't want
to pay attention to.
>>LISA: Oh, I see.
I see what you're saying.
>>FRED: You don't want
to mess around with that.
You can.
Yogis do it.
But you have to be careful
when you start messing around
with things which are pretty
much doing what they're
supposed to be doing
without you messing around
with your conscious mind.
So, there's a certain
amount of let it be.
Let it be.
It's got a million years
of genetic evolution
which has given you
the ability to not
have to think about that stuff,
so why you want to get into it?
What do you expect to
gain from getting into it?
That's the question
you have to ask.
>>LISA: So, and as
quantum physics also says,
let it be and let it go.
Really, I never
really thought about
that quantum physics
explains that--
>>FRED: Yes.
>>LISA: --in such clarity.
Could you explain that
a little bit for us?
>>FRED: Well, basically,
it's a question
of what it means to learn
to do something which
is, I would say, not
letting it being, but more
or less focusing on
how to make it better,
creating it, and letting it
go, which means allowing more
possibilities to enter so that
you can change what you have
or what you're doing.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
Great.
So, God, great question from
our Facebook listener, Mark.
Why do you think physics is
not taught in high school?
>>FRED: It's what do
you think about how
physics is taught
in high school?
>>LISA: Oh, about how
physics is taught.
OK, great.
>>FRED: OK.
What do I think about that?
Well, it depends on the
high school teacher.
Physics is very much
a very personal thing.
And the teacher has a lot to do
with how the course is taught.
>>LISA: Someone like you
who's dynamic and cares
really can get the concepts
across in a colorful way
would be helpful.
>>FRED: That depends
on the students.
>>LISA: It does?
>>FRED: Yes, of course it does.
Because students
who take physics
can take physics for
various different reasons.
One is it's required,
and I gotta take it,
but I don't like it.
>>LISA: Right, I
don't understand it.
>>FRED: I don't
understand any of it.
What has it got to
do with my sex life?
What is it got to do
with my making money?
Who's got-- it has everything
to do with all those things.
>>LISA: I was about
to say, doesn't it?
Yeah.
>>FRED: Everything to do
with all those things.
But unless you're
willing to learn that,
you're not going to ever
really understand that.
So there's a lot that
physics has to do,
and the best way,
I think, is to have
enthusiastic
teachers teaching it.
That's all it really
takes, is just
to have an enthusiasm
and a desire
to ignite that thing which gets
ignited when you understand
something for the first time.
>>LISA: See, and
those who really
adhere to it understand it.
It does take a stretch of mind.
It gets you out of your
current everyday survival,
when you really understand the
vastness of quantum physics.
And I absolutely love that, too.
What does physics have to do
with making money, by the way?
Just curious.
I know this isn't our topic.
And I'm looking at
our Facebook questions
and asking what
someone's asking that.
>>FRED: Well, let's see.
How about Steve Jobs?
>>LISA: OK.
And how did he relate
physics to making money?
>>FRED: Well, what in all
heaven's name is a computer
but applied physics?
And have you ever heard of HD?
Have you ever heard
of-- all right.
Almost every single
device-- I mean,
you've got-- you're
carrying quantum physics
in your hand with your
Apple phone, or your iPhone,
or whatever you're using.
I mean, it's all based
upon quantum physics.
It was discovered based upon the
principles of quantum physics.
Those things don't work
without quantum physics.
So how does physics make money?
I mean, my God, you ever
heard of the internet?
I mean none of that is even
possible without quantum
physics.
>>LISA: Because--
>>FRED: And who
knows what's next.
>>LISA: Because it connects
space, time, and matter?
>>FRED: It connects us all.
I mean, it's opened
up the whole door--
>>LISA: Beautiful.
>>FRED: --to communication.
So quantum physics has been--
we're living in the quantum
age, and it's still developing.
We're getting into
quantum biology.
We're wanting to
change our lives.
We're putting in--
>>LISA: Stem cells--
>>FRED: --drugs.
>>LISA: --and whatever.
>>FRED: Stem cells.
I mean, there's so
much we're doing
right now that's based upon--
>>LISA: Quantum physics.
>>FRED: --the
understanding we've
got from-- without
quantum physics,
we never would have
understood DNA.
>>LISA: Amazing.
Absolutely amazing, this
is what I'm talking about.
Fred Allan Wolfe is my guest.
We're going to
take a quick break.
But we're talking about how to
bring in the concept of quantum
physics to your everyday life.
How to live a quantum
life, essentially.
We see it all around us.
Thank you so much for
illuminating that for us.
I appreciate it.
And we're going to
take a quick break.
We will be right back.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr.
I'll be right back.
Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
Hi, I'm Lisa Garr.
And my guest is Fred
Allan Wolfe, also known
as Dr. Quantum, like
I like to call him.
Because we're talking
about quantum physics
today, and bringing it
into our current reality,
whatever that might be.
Because it's all
an illusion anyway.
So, give me an example of
what this might look like.
>>FRED: Well, you
know the writers
that created a wonderful
television show a couple
years ago-- 20 years ago
or so-- called "Star Trek."
Gene Roddenberry's
great invention,
which led to "Star Trek:
The Next Generation," which
I thought-- I love "Star Trek."
I was a fan.
Bill Shatner, he's a--
>>LISA: Way ahead of
its time, that show.
That was a great show.
>>FRED: But "The
Next Generation"
was really what I consider to
be the best that they've done.
And in that
particular show, they
had one episode that I thought
was really striking which
illustrates the notion that we
live in a holographic universe.
It was a show that was
entitled Ship in a Bottle.
You've seen ships in bottles.
And what happens in this
show is really interesting.
They have aboard
the Enterprise, they
have a room called the holoroom.
The holoroom is a
room with just walls,
but it's capable of
generating holographic images.
>>LISA: I remember this.
Yeah.
>>FRED: Yes.
And these holographic
images are so
real that they become
three dimensional
in the middle of the room.
And so that people can
walk into the holoroom.
And when they walked
into this holoroom
with characters that are being
created by the holographic room
itself, they can
interact with them.
And the room-- the
characters interact
with the so-called real
characters or the real ship
members.
Well, one day, this
character emerges
who calls himself Dr.
Moriarty, from Sherlock Holmes,
probably because
Data was dreaming up
stories about Sherlock Holmes.
And Dr. M appears and says,
I think, therefore I am.
I am not going to
risk-- I'm not going
to stay the rest of my
life in this holoroom.
I have a memory.
Something that Data must
have done to change a program
to give this character the
ability to think what he has
is a memory.
I have a memory,
and I know that I
am Dr. Moriarty in
a holographic room.
And I'm going to get out
of this holographic room.
Well, the holographic room
looks something like this.
It's a big empty lattice of
possibility with a doorway.
And so, Dr. Moriarty says, no.
I'm not going to stay
in this room anymore.
I don't want to be here anymore.
I'm going to walk out of
the holoroom entirely.
And everybody says,
you can't do that.
It's against holographic
principal physics.
There's no way that a
hologram can walk out
of the holograph room.
You just can't do that.
You can't exist out there.
That's nonexistence.
There is no such thing.
And Dr. Moriarty says no.
He says, I think,
therefore I am.
And I'm going to do that.
So Dr. Moriarty says open.
The doors open.
And he walks out
into the spaceship.
And the rest of the
crew says, oh my God.
He's done it.
He's created himself
outside of the holoroom.
>>LISA: He's become real.
>>FRED: How-- He's become real.
How did he do that?
What is going on here?
Well, we're all wondering, too.
How is it possible
that this character
could have suddenly emerged
and started walking around
the ship doing all
kinds of mischief
like they usually do in
these kind of stories.
Well, it turns out that this
character, Dr. Moriarty,
really never left the holo room.
But being clever, and
learning the creative process,
and learning to identify with
the creator process-- which
in this case was Data's fertile
mind-- I'm kind of making this
up as I go along.
It may not be exactly
the way the stories went.
He created a holoroom within the
holoroom, within the holoroom,
within the holoroom,
within the holoroom.
So that even though he appeared
to walk out of the holoroom
into the spaceship, he never
had really left the real quote,
unquote holoroom.
>>LISA: Are you
applying this at home?
Really?
I mean, think about
this in your own life,
how we are creating an image,
an illusion of ourselves.
Are we really real?
>>FRED: Right.
Right, and Dr. Moriarty
thinks that he is now real,
and he wants to
explore the universe.
So Picard, the captain,
thinks of a very clever way
to do this.
He programs the
whole-- once they
catch on to what's
going on-- the crew
catches-- or takes
the software that's
generating this whole thing
and encapsulate it inside
of a cube, together
with images of the crew
so that Dr. Moriarty
never really catches on
that he's part of a
holographic computer program.
>>LISA: Got it.
Got it.
Yeah.
>>FRED: And so then, the
crew member holding up a cube
containing the whole kit and
caboodle with Dr. Moriarty,
and Picard, and the
ship, and even visions
of the whole universe--
holding up the cube,
wondering, wait a minute,
what is really going on here?
Is this really the way it is?
Or am I, myself, a
projection from some bigger
holographic room that
I don't know about.
>>LISA: Which is what we are.
>>FRED: Which is what
the current physics says.
>>LISA: That we are.
>>FRED: So, we are actually
like this story that
is projected from
some bigger holoroom.
In this case, the
holoroom are the surfaces
at the beginning and ending
of time, where the mind of God
is fertile and existing.
>>LISA: So, we can really
dream up our own reality.
>>FRED: If we can
imagine this, we
can begin to identify with it.
And you actually get
a chance to do it.
>>LISA: In what way?
>>FRED: When you die.
>>LISA: Isn't it a little late?
>>FRED: You also get a chance
to do it when you're born.
You get glimpses of who you
really are at those moments.
But very quickly--
>>LISA: Why don't we--
>>FRED: --before and after--
>>LISA: --experience
that in our daily lives?
>>FRED: That's a good question.
And the answer is that
you can identify with it,
but you have to realize
that being holographic
doesn't necessarily
make the world have
any difficulties with it.
There's nothing
hard to push around.
There's no matter
to push around.
There's no striving
for anything.
There's no worthwhileness.
Everything's, so to speak, free.
And while that sounds wonderful
for maybe the first four
or five days of that kind
of, oh everything's free,
I can have whatever I
want, after a while,
when you realize you
can have anything
you want whenever you need
it, or whenever you want it,
you don't want anything anymore.
What you want is the
opposite of that.
>>LISA: Exactly how
long would that take?
>>FRED: Oh, four or five days.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
>>FRED: That's about it.
>>LISA: Really?
>>FRED: Four or five
days of getting anything
you want, any time you
want it, it's about enough.
You'd be bored after
four or five days.
Some people are bored after
that after a couple of minutes.
>>LISA: Well,
that's interesting.
Because I would want
to have other people
experience it with me, or
share that with other people,
or in some way pay it forward
or something like that.
Yeah, that's true.
That's true.
It would be pretty
lonely, wouldn't it?
>>FRED: It could turn out to be
a kind of a lonely experience.
>>LISA: Because we want
to share it with everyone.
>>FRED: The being all one.
For example, let's
say you realize now
that you're everything
there is, everything
that was, everything
that will be.
In fact was, will be,
is have no meaning,
because you're beyond
space and time.
So you are all
there is eternally.
How would you feel being
all there is forever
and ever and ever and ever
and ever and never, ever
having anything other
than eternal existence
forever and ever, being able
to do whatever you want.
Eventually, you start to think
about creating limitation.
>>LISA: Interesting.
Yeah, to-- I mean, think about
that at home and then breathe.
Because that is a vast,
vast, vast concept.
And then, you would think
about where are the boundaries.
Just like a little kid--
>>FRED: That's exactly right.
>>LISA: --wondering where--
they come into the world
and the universe
is a blur to them.
And they look for where they can
bump up against it to find out
how they are in relationship.
>>FRED: Exactly, exactly.
>>LISA: Absolutely
that would be there.
So, we are a live
show here, and we're
encouraging you to
communicate with us
via Facebook and Twitter.
And we have some questions
coming in here, too.
Wow.
Jan asked about
what do you think
about the law of attraction.
What do you think about that in
quantum physics perspectives?
>>FRED: Well, I've said a lot
about that on my web page.
You can read a longer
answer than I'm
going to give right here.
But the law of
attraction is really
a kind of more of a
sales kind of a thing.
It's to get people outside of
their normal kind of thinking.
But the law of
attraction in physics
is that opposites attract,
not likes attract.
So--
>>LISA: Explain.
>>FRED: Well, a positive
electrical charge
does not attract another
positive electrical charge.
In fact, it repels it.
So likes repel each other.
A positive electrical
charge will
attract a negative
electrical charge.
And if it didn't do
that, we wouldn't
have electricity nor even
the existence of atoms.
>>LISA: That explains
a lot of things.
Yeah.
So in relationships that
explains that, but what about--
>>FRED: And often
in relationships
we find a similar
of kind of thing,
opposites attracting each other.
And so--
>>LISA: What about goals?
When you want to attract goals?
>>FRED: Well,
rather than thinking
about attracting
something to yourself,
think about what it is that
you can give of yourself
which will make
your life better.
Rather than bringing
something in,
what can you push out
from yourself that'll
make your life more
interesting and better.
Because it's really in the
giving that the greater joy
is achieved.
Spiritual teachers have
been telling this for years,
but until you actually
start doing it,
you're not going to
know what I'm talking.
>>LISA: If we could all do
that on a quantum level,
this would be a different
place, absolutely.
>>FRED: Well, we're doing it.
I mean, we're getting
more people doing it.
And people are asking
the right questions.
It is going on.
And it's going to continue.
>>LISA: That's a good news.
All right, so our
slide that we have here
is about the teachings
of Chuang Tzu.
>>FRED: That's right.
In the ancient--
you know, I've just
taken you through the
"Star Trek" story.
But Chuang Tzu was
a great philosopher.
And he wrote these words.
He says that someday will
come this Great Awakening.
And we're all going
to realize something,
that life is no
more than a dream.
Yet the foolish
will go on thinking
that they are awake, and that
everything-- this is real.
This is reality, darn it.
This is the way it is.
And surveying the
panorama of all the things
that make up our lives, they
will call this one a prince.
And that one over
there, well he's
richer than, gosh, anybody else.
And that's a slob.
He's poorer than anybody else.
And he's a nothing.
He's a something.
I want to be with
the somethings,
not with the nothings.
And all that kind of stuff
that we keep going through.
And all that kind of thinking,
and thinking and talking,
all that is part of just
no more than a dream.
And I, who say this, Chuang
Tzu said, I who say this,
I am also a dream.
I, too, am a dream.
Is this a butterfly dreaming
he's Chuang Tzu or Chuang
Tzu dreaming he's a butterfly?
>>LISA: Is it the
caterpillar dreaming
that he's a butterfly or
the butterfly dreaming
he's a caterpillar?
>>FRED: The caterpillar
dreams he's a butterfly.
>>LISA: Yeah, he does.
>>FRED: Otherwise he
wouldn't go through all that.
>>LISA: He has the DNA
strand of a butterfly.
>>FRED: He's got the desire.
>>LISA: Yeah, he
does, absolutely.
>>FRED: Because it
takes a lot of work
to make yourself
into a caterpillar.
>>LISA: One of our--
>>FRED: I mean,
into a butterfly.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely,
takes a lot of work.
Ryan is asking
what about deja vu?
Is that a collision
of realities?
And parallel universes,
another-- Patrick
is also asking how do we access
these parallel universes?
Do they exist?
>>FRED: Well, parallel
realities and deja vu
are really similar questions
in a certain sense.
When you have a deja vu
experience, what you're
experiencing is, in a certain
sense, what at the time
was about to be and
you're reminded of that.
It's really something which lets
you know that you've seen this
before, in a parallel
world, possibly.
So that's what the deja
vu experience is about.
Oh, yeah.
I remember having this
conversation before.
Well, indeed, you may
have had that conversation
before in your parallel world
self or your otherworldly self.
So deja vu is a kind
of reminder of that.
>>LISA: Do you
really believe that?
That that--
>>FRED: Yeah, well,
because there's
no reason why we don't
have these parallel worlds.
>>LISA: What makes you say that?
>>FRED: What?
Because that's what quantum
physics is telling us.
I mean, whether I
believe it or not,
it's just that
quantum physics works
to explain a lot of stuff.
And it does say there
are parallel worlds.
So whether we like it or
not, it seems to be there.
There are two kinds
of vu experiences.
There's deja vu and
there's jamais vu.
And jamais vu is never having
had this experience before.
Of the two, I prefer jamais
vu, because jamais vu
is really exciting.
>>LISA: Experiencing
it for the first time.
>>FRED: I've never
done this before, wow.
Deja vu, well, everything,
in a way, is deja vu.
If things are so deja vu that
you've done them over and over
again, they get--
it becomes jamais vu
that you may have
the experience of not
having had that experience.
>>LISA: You said something that
I don't want you to gloss over.
You said that quantum
physics really
does explain parallel universes.
My mind is hooked on--
>>FRED: They're necessary.
>>LISA: Explain.
I want to know more about that.
>>FRED: Well, because
quantum physics
says there are many--
remember the bubbles?
There are many
possible-- each bubble
is a possible world, a universe.
And quantum physics
tells us that there
are many possibilities
that must coexist,
that we don't just
have one or the other;
we get one and the other.
So parallel worlds are just a
different possible storylines
which can develop through
those bubbles of possibility.
>>LISA: So let me bring
this into practical use.
So, if we want to try to
determine the outcome.
Say you're in a lawsuit, or
you want the positive truth
to come out.
Can you access the parallel
universe for the positive truth
to come out of some situation?
>>FRED: You can.
And sometimes it's not very
likely that it'll happen.
It depends on a lot of
factors, which may have more
to do with your own
personal you-ness.
The big trick in identifying
with the big dreamer
is to remember who
you really are.
And you're not just that person
who wants that particular goal.
>>LISA: So there's a lot
of different influences.
>>FRED: There's a
lot of different yous
that are going on.
And so, if you identify
with the big dreamer,
then you have a feeling
of almost satisfaction
with whatever happens.
>>LISA: There's a lot of
different observers, as well,
affecting and impacting it.
>>FRED: Well, there's
different illusions
of different observers.
Because one-- There's illusions
of-- there's only one observer
in all this stuff.
>>LISA: You.
>>FRED: You.
And you are the big observer.
But you have to remember that.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Absolutely fascinating.
All right, so how--
I asked you about how
this could change
our past or present.
You've said many
times here that I
am the universe, that I am God.
You've said that many times.
I've heard this statement
before in different references
and texts and so forth.
How does quantum
physics explain that?
>>FRED: It explains
it by bringing
into our way of understanding
how the universe gets created
that there must be a
field which allows matter
to come into existence.
And without this field,
and in the currents
searched there--
because they don't
get into mind of God type of
talk in physics laboratories.
They call it the Higgs
field, H-I-G-G-S field,
which they believe is necessary
for producing the interactions
for these spin one half light
particles to bounce back
and forth in a zig zag dance,
appearing to slow down,
and therefore appear
as material existence.
So this minefield is what is
the essence of quantum physics.
And therefore the
essence of reality.
>>LISA: Reality.
I was going to say.
I didn't want to say it
before you because I'm just
grasping this along with you.
But I did get it.
A reality, yeah, absolutely.
All right, so, I love this.
You guys are really engaging.
There's great questions coming
in on Facebook and Twitter.
So, is time really speeding up?
One of our Facebook
listeners is asking.
I love it.
I love it, yeah.
>>FRED: Well, you know, time
speeding up or slowing down
depends upon which way
you have of observing it.
So, yes you can experience time
speeding up or slowing down.
And we all know various
ways of talking about that.
Put your finger on a hot
stove and time goes very fast.
>>LISA: Yes.
Or if you have a busy
day, time goes very fast.
Yes
>>FRED: Right.
If you're making love
with your favorite lover,
time can sometimes goes
just the other way around.
I mean, go too fast,
too slow, depending
on how well you like
the other person.
>>LISA: Your observer.
Being the observer, yes.
>>FRED: So, there's
various ways that time
could go depending
upon the observer.
And what we're looking
at are relative events.
But in relativity
theory, we also
know that a moving
observer experiences
time running slow in comparison
with a rest observer.
But what that deals
with is really
two different ways of observing
and trying to compare them,
one to the other, based upon one
or the other's point of view.
Because from each point of
view, the other guy is moving.
And so, from my point of
view, if other guy's moving,
his time runs slow,
from his point of view,
since I'm the one moving, he
would say my time runs slow.
>>LISA: You gave an
example of two cars
moving parallel to each other
but moving at the same time.
And it feels like you're
moving at the same time.
One could go faster or slower
as you move along, right?
>>FRED: Well, the
relative speed-- yes.
You would say
that-- exactly that,
that if you're going
along at the same speed,
it looks like nobody's moving.
But if one guy
starts to speed up,
it looks like you're going very
slow relative to the other guy.
And he's-- or you could
say you're standing still
and he's going backwards.
>>LISA: OK.
All right, so, another question
coming in from Facebook.
Can we actually time travel
and transcend space and time?
I think you have a
slide about that.
>>FRED: Well, basically, we are
time traveling all of the time.
It's just that we've learned
to hold onto, or fixate, on who
and what we are at
the particular moment.
And that fixation
becomes so ingrained--
>>LISA: Boy, do we, yes.
>>FRED: --that it becomes
like-- have you ever
seen people that are
always tight fisted?
And you say, well,
relax your hand.
Well, I can't.
That's how we are about our ego,
I. We just can't open it up.
>>LISA: We get so
wrapped up in who we are.
>>FRED: We're wrapped up
in who and what we are.
So we have the
illusion-- then it
seems like what I'm
talking about is nonsense.
What do you mean take
time-- I can't time travel.
I'm here now.
>>LISA: Well, let
me ask about you.
When someone asks you what
do you do, what do you say?
>>FRED: It depends
on what they ask me.
I mean, if they
ask me about do I
time travel or
something like that.
You know what I mean?
>>LISA: Well, like
when they say hi, Fred.
What do you do for a living?
I love it.
>>FRED: Well, my basic
thing that I do, I breathe.
I smell.
I hear.
I taste.
I touch.
I think, therefore I am.
>>LISA: Good answer.
Very good answer, no, that's
perfect coming from you.
One of the listeners is asking--
Heather-- do you meditate?
Tell us a little
bit about your--
>>FRED: I'd like
to talk about that.
Because meditation
is a word that
can be very easily confused.
And it may not mean
what you think it means.
Meditation, for most of us,
in our business lifetimes,
means stopping and
getting off the trolley,
and sitting still, and going om
mani padme hum, or oh, money,
pad my home, or whatever
you call meditation.
And it could mean any of
those kinds of things,
and that's a meditation.
But meditation can
also mean-- I smell.
I hear.
I listen.
I taste.
I touch.
I feel.
Meditation can be the
awareness of the wonders
of your own existence.
In Buddhist
meditation technique,
you think all they do
is sit and meditate.
>>LISA: No.
>>FRED: No.
They do walking meditation.
And what do they have you do?
Wake up and smell the
flowers, feel the wind,
listen to the air.
Meditation could
be a slowing down.
It could be a speeding up.
You're a runner,
and you're running.
You're a baseball player, and
you're about to hit a ball.
Meditation will allow you to
hit the ball even though it's
coming at you at nearly
100 miles per hour.
Meditation is the aware--
is putting your awareness
to work, so to speak,
without working
at putting your
awareness to work.
>>LISA: That's a
beautiful thing to say.
Especially now, at this hour
in the day, to have that moment
was really special.
Because we can tend to
get moving very, very
fast in this society.
So I appreciated that.
Fred Allan Wolfe
was in the movie
"What the Bleep do We Know?"
A great movie that we
have on Gaiam TV, as well.
And it's-- there's a piece
that we have from that movie.
And it's a great film.
I want you to take
a look at that.
It kind of encapsulates
what we have to say.
>>FRED: First of all, let's
talk about the subatomic world.
And then we'll talk about what
it's telling us about reality.
The first thing I want to tell
you about the subatomic world
is it's totally
a fantasy created
by mad physicists trying to
figure out what the heck is
going when they do these
little experiments.
By little experiments, I mean
big energy in little spaces
and little pieces of time.
It gets pretty nutty at
that realm of things.
And so, subatomic
physics was invented
to try to figure that all out.
We need a new
science down there.
It's called quantum physics.
And it is subject to a whole
range of debatable hypotheses,
thoughts, feelings,
intuitions as
to what the heck
is really going on.
This leads, naturally,
to wonder do
people-- are people affecting
the world of reality
that they see?
You betcha they are.
Every single one of us affects
the reality that we see,
even if we try to hide
from that and play victim.
We all are doing it.
>>LISA: That is--
that was beautifully
done by Will Arntz
and Betsy Chasse.
It's a great film.
And it shows-- highlights all
sorts of interesting things,
all things quantum physics.
We have just a few
minutes left, but I
wanted to mention
that all of this,
what we have to talk about here,
what we've been talking about,
is how quantum physics
connects us all.
It can change the way
that we view our past.
that we create our future.
It can change our
current existence,
because we are always
the observers, correct?
>>FRED: Yes.
And one thing you might do
when you get out of here--
or wherever you
are right now, is
to begin to experience
that connection.
We all can do it.
I do it all the time.
I mean, the people I meet,
I've never met them before,
and the connection will arise.
Because there is an awareness
that comes about that
goes beyond the words or
things that you can do.
It doesn't even--
it's not what you're
doing at the moment that
makes that connection appear.
And suddenly, somebody
will come into your life,
and you'll feel connected.
I've had this happen
many, many times
in many different countries with
many different kinds of people,
and it always amazes me.
Because at that moment,
there's the knowing
that we are the one
rather than the illusion
that we are the separate
beings that we're disguised
as playing in this
particular role.
>>LISA: And that's exactly what
has happened with me, with you
here today.
Is that--
>>FRED: Oh, well, thank you.
>>LISA: --I've met you
and connected with you
for the first time.
And it has been awesome.
And then we've connected
with the audience.
So we've all become one in
this hour, here on Gaiam TV.
So, thank you so much.
I've learned so much
about time travel,
about how we're the creators
of our own experiences
and the observer.
So, thank you so much.
>>FRED: It's been
a pleasure, Lisa.
Thanks for having
me on your show.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
It's been a pleasure
for us, too.
And I hope that you enjoyed it.
If you want to watch a
replay of this interview
with Fred Allan Wolfe, you
can share it with your friends
by going to gaiamtv.com.
There's a lot of great
other interviews on there
as well, inspirational
films, a lot more.
So just go sign up for your
free trial at gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I invite
you all to stay inspired.
Thanks for watching.
I'm Lisa Garr.